

Overview
A hot flash is a sudden feeling of warmth in the upper body. It most often affects the face, neck and chest. A hot flash also can cause sweating. Some people might feel chilled after a hot flash because of loss of body heat.
Night sweats are hot flashes that happen at night. They can disturb sleep.
The time when is when menstrual periods get less regular and then stop, called menopause, is the most common cause of hot flashes. And hot flashes are the most common symptom of this change of life.
There are treatments for hot flashes that cause bother and make you uncomfortable.



Symptoms
A hot flash might involve:
A sudden feeling of warmth spreading through the chest, neck and face.
Skin that looks flushed and blotchy. 
Fast heartbeat.
Sweating, mostly on the upper body.
Feeling chilled as the hot flash lets up.
Feelings of not being at ease, called anxiety.
How often hot flashes happen differs from person to person. But most people who have hot flashes have them daily. One hot flash may last 1 to 5 minutes.
On average, people who have hot flashes have them for more than seven years. Some people have them for more than 10 years.
Hot flashes may be mild. Or they can be so strong that they disrupt daily activities. They happen at any time of day or night. Nighttime hot flashes, also called night sweats, may wake you from sleep and can cause long-term sleep loss.

When to see a doctor
If hot flashes affect your daily activities or your sleep, talk to your healthcare professional about treatments.




Causes
Changing hormone levels before, during and after menopause are the most common causes of hot flashes. It's not clear how hormonal changes cause hot flashes.
But most research suggests that hot flashes happen when lower estrogen levels cause the body's heat manager, also called the hypothalamus, to respond to slight changes in body temperature. When the hypothalamus thinks the body is too warm, it starts a chain of events in the form of a hot flash to cool down.
Rarely, something other than menopause causes hot flashes and nights sweats. Other causes may include medicine side effects, problems with the thyroid, some cancers and side effects of cancer treatment.

Risk factors
Not all people who go through the change of life have hot flashes. Factors that may raise the risk of having them include:
Smoking. People who smoke are more likely to get hot flashes.
Being obese. A high body mass index, also called BMI, is linked with having more hot flashes.
Race. More Black people report having hot flashes during menopause than do people of other races. Asian people report hot flashes the least often.

Complications
Hot flashes may affect daily activities and quality of life. Nighttime hot flashes, also called night sweats, can wake you from sleep. Over time, this can cause long-term sleep loss.
Research suggests that people who have hot flashes may have a higher risk of heart disease and greater bone loss than people who don't have hot flashes.




Skip to content

Request appointment
Log in
Search
Menu
Diseases & Conditions
Heat exhaustion
Request an Appointment
Symptoms &
causes
Diagnosis &
treatment
Overview
Heat exhaustion is a condition that happens when your body overheats. Symptoms may include heavy sweating and a rapid pulse. Heat exhaustion is one of three heat-related illnesses, with heat cramps being the mildest and heatstroke being the most serious.
Causes of heat illness include exposure to high temperatures, particularly when there is also high humidity, and strenuous physical activity. Without prompt treatment, heat exhaustion can lead to heatstroke, a life-threatening condition. Fortunately, heat exhaustion is preventable.
Symptoms
Symptoms of heat exhaustion may start suddenly or progress over time, especially with prolonged periods of exercise. Possible heat exhaustion symptoms include:
Cool, moist skin with goose bumps when in the heat.
Heavy sweating. 
Faintness.
Dizziness.
Fatigue.
Weak, rapid pulse.
Low blood pressure upon standing.
Muscle cramps.
Nausea.
Headache.
When to see a doctor
If you think you have heat exhaustion:
Stop all activity and rest.
Move to a cooler place.
Drink cool water or sports drinks.
Contact your doctor if your symptoms get worse or they don't improve within one hour.
If you're with someone who has heat exhaustion, seek immediate medical help if they become confused or distressed, lose consciousness, or are unable to drink. If their core body temperature — measured by a rectal thermometer — reaches 104 F (40 C) or higher, they need immediate cooling and urgent medical attention.
Request an appointment
 
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.


Causes
The body's heat combined with environmental heat results in what's called your core temperature. This is your body's inner temperature. Your body needs to regulate heat gain in hot weather or heat loss in cold weather to keep a core temperature that's typical for you. The average core temperature is about 98.6 F (37 C).
When your body can't cool itself
In hot weather, your body cools itself mainly by sweating. The evaporation of your sweat regulates your body temperature. But when you exercise strenuously or otherwise overexert in hot, humid weather, your body is less able to cool itself efficiently.
As a result, heat cramps may start in your body. Heat cramps are the mildest form of heat-related illness. Symptoms of heat cramps often include heavy sweating, fatigue, thirst and muscle cramps. Prompt treatment may prevent heat cramps from progressing to more-serious heat illnesses such as heat exhaustion.
Drinking fluids or sports drinks that have electrolytes (Gatorade, Powerade, others) can help treat heat cramps. Other treatments for heat cramps include getting into cooler temperatures, such as an air-conditioned or shaded place, and resting.
Other causes
Besides hot weather and strenuous activity, other causes of heat exhaustion include:
Dehydration, which lessens your body's ability to sweat and keep a normal temperature.
Alcohol use, which can affect your body's ability to regulate your temperature.
Overdressing, particularly in clothes that don't allow sweat to evaporate easily.
Risk factors
Anyone can get heat illness, but certain factors increase your sensitivity to heat. They include:
Young age or old age. Infants and children younger than 4 and adults older than 65 are at higher risk of heat exhaustion. The body's ability to regulate its temperature isn't fully developed in children. In older adults, illness, medicines or other factors can affect the body's ability to control temperature.
Certain drugs. Some medicines can affect your body's ability to stay hydrated and respond properly to heat. These include some medicines used to treat high blood pressure and heart problems (beta blockers, diuretics), reduce allergy symptoms (antihistamines), calm you (tranquilizers), or reduce psychiatric symptoms such as delusions (antipsychotics). Some illegal drugs, such as cocaine and amphetamines, can increase your core temperature.
Obesity. Carrying excess weight can affect your body's ability to regulate its temperature and cause your body to keep more heat.
Sudden temperature changes. If you're not used to the heat, you're more susceptible to heat-related illnesses, such as heat exhaustion. The body needs time to get used to higher temperatures. Traveling to a warm climate from a cold one or living in an area that experiences an early heat wave can put you at risk of a heat-related illness. The body hasn't had a chance to get used to the higher temperatures.
A high heat index. The heat index is a single temperature value that considers how both the outdoor temperature and humidity make you feel. When the humidity is high, your sweat can't evaporate as easily, and your body has more trouble cooling itself. This makes you more prone to heat exhaustion and heatstroke. When the heat index is 91 F (33 C) or higher, you should take precautions to keep cool.
Complications
If heat exhaustion isn't treated, it can lead to heatstroke. Heatstroke is a life-threatening condition. It happens when your core body temperature reaches 104 F (40 C) or higher. Heatstroke needs immediate medical attention to prevent permanent damage to your brain and other vital organs that can result in death.
Prevention
There are a lot of things you can do to prevent heat exhaustion and other heat-related illnesses. When temperatures climb, remember to:
Wear loose fitting, lightweight clothing. Wearing too much clothing or clothing that fits tightly won't allow your body to cool properly.
Protect against sunburn. Sunburn affects your body's ability to cool itself. Protect yourself outdoors with a wide-brimmed hat and sunglasses. Use a broad-spectrum sunscreen with an SPF of at least 15. Apply sunscreen generously and reapply every two hours. Reapply more often if you're swimming or sweating.
Drink plenty of fluids. Staying hydrated helps your body sweat and keep a normal body temperature.
Be careful with certain medicines. Watch for heat-related problems if you take medicines that can affect your body's ability to stay hydrated and respond to heat.
Never leave anyone in a parked car. This is a common cause of heat-related deaths in children. When parked in the sun, the temperature in your car can rise 20 degrees Fahrenheit (more than 11 C) in 10 minutes.
It's not safe to leave someone in a parked car in warm or hot weather, even if the windows are cracked or the car is in shade. Keep parked cars locked to prevent a child from getting inside.
Take it easy during the hottest parts of the day. If you can't avoid strenuous activity in hot weather, drink fluids and rest often in a cool spot. Try to schedule exercise or physical labor for cooler parts of the day, such as early morning or evening.
Get acclimated. Limit time spent working or exercising in heat until you're conditioned to it. People who aren't used to hot weather are especially susceptible to heat-related illness. It can take several weeks for your body to adjust to hot weather.
Be cautious if you're at increased risk. If you take medicines or have a condition that increases your risk of heat-related problems, such as a history of prior heat illness, be cautious. Avoid the heat and act quickly if you notice symptoms of overheating. If you take part in a strenuous sporting event or activity in hot weather, make sure there are medical services ready in case of a heat emergency.


Diagnosis &
treatment
Doctors &
departments
Overview
Hypothermia is a condition that occurs when core body temperature drops below 95 degrees Fahrenheit (35 degrees Celsius). It is a medical emergency. In hypothermia (hi-poe-THUR-me-uh), the body loses heat faster than it can produce heat, causing a dangerously low body temperature. Regular body temperature is around 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit (37 degrees Celsius).


When body temperature drops, the heart, nervous system and other organs can't work as well as they usually do. Left untreated, hypothermia can cause the heart and respiratory system to fail and eventually can lead to death.
Common causes of hypothermia include exposure to cold weather or immersion in cold water. Treatment for hypothermia includes methods to warm the body back to a regular temperature.
Products & Services
A Book: Mayo Clinic First-Aid Guide for the Outdoor Adventurer
Show more products from Mayo Clinic
Symptoms
When the temperature starts to drop, the body can start to shiver. Shivering is the body's attempt to warm itself. It is an automatic defense against cold temperature.
Symptoms of hypothermia include:
Shivering.
Slurred speech or mumbling.
Slow, shallow breathing.
Weak pulse.
Clumsiness or lack of coordination.
Drowsiness or very low energy.
Confusion or memory loss.
Loss of consciousness.
In infants, bright red, cold skin.
People with hypothermia usually aren't aware of their condition. The symptoms often begin gradually. Also, the confused thinking associated with hypothermia prevents self-awareness. The confused thinking also can lead to risk-taking behavior.
When to see a doctor
Call 911 or your local emergency number if you suspect someone has hypothermia.
While waiting for emergency help to arrive, gently move the person inside if possible. Jarring movements can trigger dangerous irregular heartbeats. Carefully remove any wet clothing and replace it with warm, dry coats or blankets.


 


Causes
Hypothermia occurs when the body loses heat faster than it produces it. The most common causes of hypothermia are exposure to cold-weather conditions or cold water. But prolonged exposure to any environment colder than the body can lead to hypothermia if a person isn't dressed properly or can't control the conditions.
Specific conditions leading to hypothermia include:
Wearing clothes that aren't warm enough for weather conditions.
Staying out in the cold too long.
Being unable to get out of wet clothes or move to a warm, dry location.
Falling into the water, such as in a boating accident.
Living in a house that's too cold, either from poor heating or too much air conditioning.
How your body loses heat
The mechanisms of heat loss from the body include:
Radiated heat. Most heat loss is due to heat radiated from unprotected surfaces of the body.
Direct contact. Direct contact with something very cold takes heat away from the body. Examples include contact with cold water or the cold ground. Because water is very good at transferring heat from the body, body heat is lost much faster in cold water than in cold air. Similarly, heat loss from the body is much faster if clothes are wet, as from being caught out in the rain.
Wind. Wind removes body heat by carrying away the thin layer of warm air at the surface of the skin. A wind chill factor is important in causing heat loss.
Risk factors
Risk factors for hypothermia include:
Exhaustion. Fatigue reduces a person's ability to tolerate cold.
Older age. The body's ability to regulate temperature and to sense cold may lessen with age. And some older adults may not be able to tell someone when they are cold or to move to a warm location if they do feel cold.
Very young age. Children lose heat faster than adults do. Children also may ignore the cold because they're having too much fun to think about it. They may not have the judgment to dress properly in cold weather or to get out of the cold when they should.
Mental conditions. People with a mental illness, dementia or other conditions that interfere with judgment may not dress properly for the weather or understand the risk of cold weather. People with dementia may wander from home or get lost easily, making them more likely to be stranded outside in cold or wet weather.
Alcohol and drug use. Alcohol may make the body feel warm inside, but it causes blood vessels to expand. As a result, the surface of the skin loses heat more rapidly. Alcohol also reduces the body's natural shivering response.
In addition, the use of alcohol or recreational drugs can affect judgment about the need to get inside or wear warm clothes in cold-weather conditions. A person who is intoxicated and passes out in cold weather is likely to develop hypothermia.
Certain medical conditions. Some health disorders affect the body's ability to regulate body temperature. Examples include an underactive thyroid, also called hypothyroidism; poor nutrition or anorexia nervosa; diabetes; stroke; severe arthritis; Parkinson's disease; trauma; and spinal cord injuries.
Medicines. Some drugs can change the body's ability to regulate its temperature. Examples include certain antidepressants, antipsychotics, narcotic pain medicines and sedatives.











