Overview
A chronic cough is a cough that lasts eight weeks or longer in adults, or four weeks in children. A chronic cough is more than just annoying. It can interrupt your sleep and leave you feeling very tired. Severe cases of chronic cough can cause vomiting and lightheadedness, and even break a rib.


The most common causes are tobacco use and asthma. Other common causes include fluid that drips from the nose down the back of the throat, called postnasal drip, and the backward flow of stomach acid into the tube that connects the throat to the stomach, called acid reflux. Fortunately, chronic cough usually goes away once the underlying issue is treated.
Products & Services
Symptoms
A chronic cough can occur with other symptoms, including:
A runny or stuffy nose.
A feeling of liquid running down the back of your throat, also known as postnasal drip.
Clearing your throat a lot.
Sore throat.
Hoarseness.
Wheezing and shortness of breath.
Heartburn or a sour taste in your mouth.
In rare cases, coughing up blood.
When to see a doctor
See your healthcare professional if you have a cough that lasts for weeks, especially one that brings up sputum or blood, disturbs your sleep, or affects school or work.


Causes
A cough that happens once in a while is common. It helps clear irritants and mucus from your lungs and prevents infection. But a cough that lasts for weeks is usually due to a health concern. Many times, more than one health concern causes the cough.
Most cases of chronic cough are due to these causes, which can occur alone or together:
Postnasal drip. When your nose or sinuses produce extra mucus, it can drip down the back of your throat and cause you to cough. This condition also is called upper airway cough syndrome.
Asthma. An asthma-related cough may come and go with the seasons. It may appear after an upper respiratory tract infection. Or it can get worse when you're exposed to cold air or certain chemicals or fragrances. In one type of asthma known as cough-variant asthma, a cough is the main symptom.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease. In this common condition, also called GERD, stomach acid flows back into the tube that connects your stomach and throat. This tube is also known as your esophagus. The constant irritation can lead to chronic coughing. Then the coughing can make GERD worse, creating a vicious cycle.
Infections. A cough can last long after other symptoms of pneumonia, flu, a cold or another infection of the upper respiratory tract have gone away. A common cause of a chronic cough in adults — but one that often isn't recognized — is whooping cough, also known as pertussis. Chronic cough also can occur with fungal infections of the lung, as well as tuberculosis infection, also called TB, or lung infection with nontuberculous mycobacteria, also called NTM. NTM is found in soil, water and dust.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Also called COPD, this is a lifelong inflammatory lung disease that limits airflow from the lungs. COPD includes chronic bronchitis and emphysema. Chronic bronchitis can cause a cough that brings up colored sputum. Emphysema causes shortness of breath and damages the air sacs in the lungs, also known as alveoli. Most people with COPD are current or former smokers.
Blood pressure drugs. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, also called ACE inhibitors, which are commonly prescribed for high blood pressure and heart failure, are known to cause chronic cough in some people.
Less commonly, chronic cough may be caused by:
Aspiration — when food or other items are swallowed or inhaled and go into the lungs.
Bronchiectasis — widened and damaged airways that slowly lose the ability to clear out mucus.
Bronchiolitis — an infection that causes swelling, irritation and buildup of mucus in the small airways of the lung.
Cystic fibrosis — a genetic disorder that affects the lungs, digestive system and other organs.
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis — gradual damage and scarring of the lungs due to a cause that isn't known.
Lung cancer — cancer that starts in the lungs, including non-small cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer.
Nonasthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis — when airways are inflamed but asthma is not the cause.
Sarcoidosis — groups of inflamed cells that form lumps or nodules in different parts of the body but most often in the lungs.
Risk factors
Being a current or former smoker is one of the leading risk factors for chronic cough. Exposure to a lot of secondhand smoke also can lead to coughing and lung damage.
Complications
Having a cough that doesn't stop can be very tiring. Coughing can cause various concerns, including:
Sleep disruption.
Headache.
Dizziness.
Vomiting.
Sweating a lot.
Unintended bladder loss, also known as urinary incontinence.
Broken ribs.
Passing out, also known as syncope.



Symptoms
Cough
Causes
By Mayo Clinic Staff
While a cough once in a while is common, a cough that lasts for several weeks or one that brings up discolored or bloody mucus may be a sign of a medical condition. A cough is called "acute" if it lasts less than three weeks. It's called "chronic" if it lasts longer than eight weeks in adults or longer than four weeks in children.




Infections or flares of chronic lung conditions cause most acute coughs. Most chronic coughs are related to underlying lung, heart or sinus conditions.
Common infectious causes of acute cough
Common infectious causes of acute cough include:
Acute sinusitis
Bronchiolitis (especially in young children)
Bronchitis
Common cold
Croup — especially in young children.
Influenza (flu)
Laryngitis
Pneumonia
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
Whooping cough
Some infections, particularly whooping cough, may cause so much inflammation that the cough can last for many weeks or even months after the infection itself has cleared up.
Common lung causes of chronic cough
Common lung causes of chronic cough include:
Asthma (most common in children)
Bronchiectasis, which leads to a buildup of mucus that can be streaked with blood and raise the risk of infection
Chronic bronchitis
COPD — a long-term lung disease that causes trouble with breathing.
Cystic fibrosis
Emphysema — a lung condition that causes shortness of breath.
Lung cancer
Pulmonary embolism
Sarcoidosis
Tuberculosis
Other causes of cough
Other causes of cough include:
Allergies — Injury, such as from a blunt trauma or burn.
Choking: First aid (especially in children)
Chronic sinusitis
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
Heart failure — a condition in which the heart doesn't pump blood as well as it should.
Inhaling an irritant, such as smoke, dust, chemicals or a foreign body
Medicines called angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, also known as ACE inhibitors
Neuromuscular diseases that weaken the coordination of upper airway and swallowing muscles
Postnasal drip, which means fluid from the nose runs down the back of the throat




Diagnosis
Your healthcare professional asks about your medical history and does a physical exam. A thorough medical history and physical exam can give important clues about a chronic cough. Your health professional also may order tests to look for the cause of your chronic cough.
But many health professionals start treatment for one of the common causes of chronic cough rather than ordering expensive tests. If the treatment doesn't work, you may be tested for less common causes.






Imaging tests
X-rays. Although a routine chest X-ray won't reveal the most common reasons for a cough — postnasal drip, acid reflux, tobacco use or asthma — it may be used to check for lung cancer, pneumonia and other lung diseases. An X-ray of your sinuses may reveal evidence of a sinus infection.
Computerized tomography scans. These scans also are called CT scans. They may be used to check your lungs for conditions that may produce chronic cough or your sinus cavities for pockets of infection.
Lung function tests


Spirometer
Enlarge image
These simple, noninvasive tests, such as spirometry, are used to diagnose asthma and COPD. They measure how much air your lungs can hold and how fast you can exhale.
Your healthcare professional may request an asthma challenge test. This test checks how well you can breathe before and after inhaling the drug methacholine (Provocholine).
Lab tests
If the mucus that you cough up is colored, your healthcare professional may want to test a sample of it for bacteria.
Scope tests
If your healthcare professional can't find the cause of your cough, special scope tests may be used to look for possible causes. These tests may include:
Bronchoscopy. A bronchoscope is a thin, flexible tube that has a light and camera attached to it. Your health professional can look at your lungs and air passages. A biopsy also can be taken from the inside lining of your airway, also known as the mucosa, to look for anything unusual. A biopsy is a procedure to remove a sample of tissue for testing in a lab.
Rhinoscopy. Using a fiberoptic scope, also known as a rhinoscope, your health professional can view your nasal passageways, sinuses and upper airway.
Children
A chest X-ray and spirometry, at a minimum, are usually ordered to find the cause of a chronic cough in children.


Treatment
Finding out what's causing a chronic cough is very important to effective treatment. In many cases, more than one underlying condition may be causing your chronic cough.
If you smoke, your healthcare professional likely will talk with you about your readiness to quit and give you advice on how to achieve this goal. If you're taking an ACE inhibitor medicine, your health professional may switch you to another medicine that doesn't have cough as a side effect.
Medicines used to treat chronic cough may include:
Antihistamines, corticosteroids and decongestants. These medicines are standard treatment for allergies and postnasal drip.
Inhaled asthma medicines. The most effective treatments for asthma-related cough are corticosteroids and bronchodilators. They reduce inflammation and open up your airways.
Antibiotics. If a bacterial, fungal or mycobacterial infection is causing your chronic cough, your healthcare professional may prescribe antibiotic medicines for the infection.
Acid blockers. When lifestyle changes don't take care of acid reflux, you may be treated with medicines that block acid production. Some people need surgery to resolve the problem.
Medicine to reduce coughing
Your healthcare professional works to find the cause of your cough and the best treatment for you. During that time, your healthcare professional also may prescribe a medicine to reduce coughing, called a cough suppressant. Cough suppressants are not recommended for children.
Cough and cold medicines available without a prescription treat the symptoms of coughs and colds — not the underlying disease. Research suggests that these medicines don't work any better than no medicine at all. These medicines are not recommended for children because of potentially serious side effects, including fatal overdoses in children younger than 2 years old.
Don't use over-the-counter cough and cold medicines, except for fever reducers and pain relievers, to treat coughs and colds in children younger than 6 years old. Also, avoid use of these medicines for children younger than 12 years old. Check with your healthcare professional for guidance.






Lifestyle and home remedies
Follow the plan your healthcare professional gives you for treating the cause of your cough. In the meantime, you can try these tips to ease your cough:
Drink fluids. Liquid helps thin the mucus in your throat. Warm liquids, such as broth, tea or juice, can soothe your throat.
Suck on cough drops or hard candies. They may ease a dry cough and soothe an irritated throat.
Consider taking honey. A teaspoon of honey may help loosen a cough. Don't give honey to children younger than 1 year old. Honey can contain bacteria harmful to infants.
Moisturize the air. Use a cool-mist humidifier or take a steamy shower.
Avoid tobacco smoke. Smoking or breathing secondhand smoke irritates your lungs and can worsen coughs. If you smoke, talk with your healthcare professional about programs and products that can help you quit.
Preparing for your appointment
You may see your family healthcare professional at first. But you may need to see a doctor who specializes in lung disorders. This health professional is known as a pulmonologist.
What you can do
Before your appointment, make a list that includes:
Detailed descriptions of your symptoms.
Information about medical problems you've had.
Information about the medical problems of your parents or siblings.
All the medicines, including those available without a prescription, vitamins, herbal preparations and dietary supplements you take.
Your smoking history.
Questions you want to ask the healthcare professional.
What to expect from your doctor
Your healthcare professional may ask some of these questions:
What are your symptoms and when did they begin?
Did you recently have the flu or a cold?
Do you smoke tobacco or have you ever smoked tobacco?
Does anyone in your family or workplace smoke?
Are you exposed to dust or chemicals at home or at work?
Do you have heartburn?
Do you cough up anything? If so, what does it look like?
Do you take blood pressure medicine? If so, what type do you take?
When does your cough occur?
Does anything relieve your cough? What treatments have you tried?
Do you get short of breath or wheeze when you move around or when exposed to cold air?
What is your travel history?
Your healthcare professional will ask more questions based on your responses, symptoms and needs. Preparing for questions will help you make the most of your time.
Skip to content

Request appointment
Log in
Search
Menu
Diseases & Conditions
Bronchitis
Request an Appointment
Symptoms &
causes
Diagnosis &
treatment
Overview
Bronchitis is an inflammation of the lining of your bronchial tubes. These tubes carry air to and from your lungs. People who have bronchitis often cough up thickened mucus, which can be discolored. Bronchitis may start suddenly and be short term (acute) or start gradually and become long term (chronic).
Advertisement
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Advertising & Sponsorship
Policy
Opportunities
Ad Choices
Acute bronchitis, which often develops from a cold or other respiratory infection, is very common. Also called a chest cold, acute bronchitis usually improves within a week to 10 days without lasting effects, although the cough may linger for weeks.
Chronic bronchitis, a more serious condition, is a constant irritation or inflammation of the lining of the bronchial tubes, often due to smoking. If you have repeated bouts of bronchitis, you may have chronic bronchitis, which requires medical attention. Chronic bronchitis is one of the conditions included in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Products & Services
A Book: Mayo Clinic Family Health Book
Show more products from Mayo Clinic
Symptoms
If you have acute bronchitis, you may have cold symptoms, such as:
Cough
Production of mucus (sputum), which can be clear, white, yellowish-gray or green in color — rarely, it may be streaked with blood
Sore throat
Mild headache and body aches
Slight fever and chills
Fatigue
Chest discomfort
Shortness of breath and wheezing
While these symptoms usually improve in about a week, you may have a nagging cough that lingers for several weeks.
For chronic bronchitis, signs and symptoms may include:
Cough
Production of mucus
Fatigue
Chest discomfort
Shortness of breath
Chronic bronchitis is typically defined as a productive cough that lasts at least three months, with bouts that recur for at least two consecutive years. If you have chronic bronchitis, you're likely to have periods when your cough or other symptoms worsen. It's also possible to have an acute infection on top of chronic bronchitis.
When to see a doctor
Contact your doctor or clinic for advice if your cough:
Is accompanied by a fever higher than 100.4 F (38 C).
Produces blood.
Is associated with serious or worsening shortness of breath or wheezing.
Includes other serious signs and symptoms, for example, you appear pale and lethargic, have a bluish tinge to your lips and nail beds, or have trouble thinking clearly or concentrating.
Lasts more than three weeks.
Before you go in, your doctor or clinic can give you guidance on how to prepare for your appointment.
 
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
Email
Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data.


Causes
Acute bronchitis is usually caused by viruses, typically the same viruses that cause colds and flu (influenza). Many different viruses — all of which are very contagious — can cause acute bronchitis. Antibiotics don't kill viruses, so this type of medication isn't useful in most cases of bronchitis.
Viruses spread mainly from person to person by droplets produced when an ill person coughs, sneezes or talks and you inhale the droplets. Viruses may also spread through contact with an infected object. This happens when you touch something with the virus on it and then touch your mouth, eyes or nose.
The most common cause of chronic bronchitis is cigarette smoking. Air pollution and dust or toxic gases in the environment or workplace also can contribute to the condition.


Risk factors
Factors that increase your risk of bronchitis include:
Cigarette smoke. People who smoke or who live with a smoker are at higher risk of both acute bronchitis and chronic bronchitis.
Low resistance. This may result from another acute illness, such as a cold, or from a chronic condition that compromises your immune system. Older adults, infants and young children have greater vulnerability to infection.
Exposure to irritants on the job. Your risk of developing bronchitis is greater if you work around certain lung irritants, such as grains or textiles, or are exposed to chemical fumes.
Gastric reflux. Repeated bouts of severe heartburn can irritate your throat and make you more prone to developing bronchitis.
Complications
Although a single episode of bronchitis usually isn't cause for concern, it can lead to pneumonia in some people. Repeated bouts of bronchitis, however, may mean that you have chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Prevention
To reduce your risk of bronchitis, follow these tips:
Get an annual flu shot. Many cases of acute bronchitis result from influenza, a virus. Getting a yearly flu vaccine can help protect you from getting the flu. Also ask your doctor or clinic if you need a vaccination that protects against certain types of pneumonia.
Wash your hands. To reduce your risk of catching a viral infection, wash your hands frequently and get in the habit of using alcohol-based hand sanitizers. Also, avoid touching your eyes, nose and mouth.
Avoid close contact with people who have a viral infection. Stay away from people who have the flu or another respiratory illness.
Avoid cigarette smoke. Cigarette smoke increases your risk of chronic bronchitis.
Wear appropriate face covering. If you have COPD, consider wearing a face mask at work if you're exposed to dust or fumes. Talk to your employer about the appropriate protection. Wearing a face mask when you're going to be among crowds helps reduce exposure to infections.


Log in
Search
Menu
Appointments at Mayo Clinic
Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Request Appointment
Symptoms
Cough
SECTIONS
When to see a doctor
By Mayo Clinic Staff
Call your healthcare professional if your cough — or your child's cough — doesn't go away after a few weeks or if it also involves:
Coughing up thick, greenish-yellow phlegm.
Wheezing.
A fever.
Shortness of breath.
Fainting.
Ankle swelling or weight loss.
Advertisement
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Advertising & Sponsorship
Policy
Opportunities
Ad Choices
Seek emergency care if you or your child is:
Choking or vomiting.
Having trouble breathing or swallowing.
Coughing up bloody or pink-tinged phlegm.
Having chest pain.
Self-care measures
Cough medicines usually are used only when a cough is a new condition, causes a lot of discomfort, disrupts your sleep and is not linked with any of the worrisome symptoms listed above. If you use cough medicine, be sure to follow the dosing instructions.
Cough and cold medicines that you buy off the shelf aim to treat the symptoms of coughs and colds, not the underlying disease. Research suggests that these medicines don't work any better than taking no medicine at all. More importantly, these medicines are not recommended for children because of risks of serious side effects, including fatal overdoses in children under 2 years old.
Don't use medicines that you can buy without a prescription, except for fever reducers and pain relievers, to treat coughs and colds in children younger than 6 years old. Also, don't use these medicines for children under 12 years old. Ask your healthcare professional for guidance.
To ease your cough, try these tips:
Suck on cough drops or hard candies. They may ease a dry cough and soothe an irritated throat. But don't give them to a child under age 6 because of the risk of choking.
Think about taking honey. A teaspoon of honey may help loosen a cough. Don't give honey to children younger than 1 year old because honey can contain bacteria harmful to babies.
Keep the air moist. Use a cool mist humidifier or take a steamy shower.
Drink fluids. Liquid helps thin the mucus in your throat. Warm liquids, such as broth, tea or lemon juice, can soothe your throat.
Stay away from tobacco smoke. Smoking or breathing secondhand smoke can make your cough worse.
 










 

Email


