

Ma


Overview

Digestive system

Indigestion is discomfort or pain in the belly. Symptoms may include a burning pain, feeling full while eating or feeling full long after eating. Indigestion symptoms may happen once in a while or often.
Indigestion may be caused by a digestive system condition. But often, there is no clear underlying cause. Frequent or long-lasting indigestion often can be treated with changes in diet and lifestyle, mental health therapy, and medicines.


Indigestion also is called upset stomach or dyspepsia.
Products & Services
A Book: Mayo Clinic on Digestive Health
Symptoms
Symptoms of indigestion may include:
Early fullness during a meal or not being able to finish a typical meal.
Uncomfortable fullness that lasts longer than it should after a meal.
Mild to severe pain in the upper abdomen, which is the area between the bottom of your breastbone and your belly button.
Burning sensation in the upper abdomen.
Bloating that feels like swelling or tightness in the upper abdomen.
Feeling the need to vomit or vomiting.
Burping or burping up food.
Sometimes people with indigestion also experience heartburn. Heartburn is a pain or burning feeling in the center of your chest during or after eating. The pain or burning feeling may radiate into your neck or back.
When to see a doctor
Mild indigestion usually is nothing to worry about. Talk with your healthcare professional if symptoms of indigestion last more than two weeks.
Get care as soon as possible if you have indigestion and these symptoms:
Severe or constant belly pain.
Unintended weight loss or loss of appetite.
Repeated vomiting or vomiting with blood.
Black, tarry stools.
Trouble with swallowing.
Fatigue or weakness.
A yellowing of the skin or eyes, also called jaundice.
Get emergency care if you have indigestion-like symptoms that may be symptoms of a heart attack:
Shortness of breath, sweating, or chest pain radiating to the jaw, neck or arm.
Chest pain when you're active or stressed.
Causes
Indigestion usually has no clear underlying medical condition as a cause. Long-lasting or frequent indigestion with no clear underlying medical cause is called functional indigestion.
Many factors may contribute to or worsen functional indigestion. These include:
Overeating or eating too quickly.
Fatty, greasy or spicy foods.
Caffeine, alcohol or carbonated beverages.
Acidic foods, such as tomatoes and oranges.
Anxiety, depression or trauma.
Smoking.
Certain antibiotics and pain relievers.
H. pylori bacteria can cause ulcers in the stomach or small intestine. H. pylori may contribute to indigestion even if it has not caused an ulcer.
Underlying causes
Several conditions can cause indigestion. Underlying causes vary among different age groups.
Children
H. pylori infection.
Other infections of the digestive system.
Conditions affecting how much food the stomach can hold or how it empties.
Stress.
Young adults
H. pylori infection.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease, also called GERD, when stomach acid regularly flows back up into the esophagus.
Diet.
Stress.
Adults ages 40 to 60
H. pylori infection.
Ulcers of the stomach or small intestine.
GERD.
Pain medicines, such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen sodium (Aleve).
Adults over 60
Ulcers of the stomach or small intestine.
GERD.
Stomach cancer.
Pain medicines, such as aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) and naproxen sodium (Aleve)
Risk factors
Several factors can make it more likely for you to have symptoms even though they don't always cause indigestion:
Eating too fast, overeating, or eating spicy, fatty, acidic or greasy foods.
Too many alcoholic, caffeinated or carbonated drinks.
Depression, anxiety or trauma.
Smoking or using other tobacco products.
Pregnancy-related hormones and pressure on the digestive system during pregnancy.
Carrying extra weight, particularly around the belly.
Complications
Although indigestion doesn't usually have serious complications, it can affect your quality of life. You may eat less. You also might miss work or school because of your symptoms.




Care at
Mayo ClinicOverview
Functional dyspepsia is a term used to describe a lingering upset stomach that has no obvious cause. Functional dyspepsia (dis-PEP-see-uh) also is called nonulcer dyspepsia.
Functional dyspepsia is common. It is a constant condition, but symptoms don't happen all the time. Symptoms are like those of an ulcer. They include pain or discomfort in the upper belly, bloating, belching and nausea.



Symptoms
Symptoms of functional dyspepsia may include:
Pain or burning in the stomach, bloating, excessive belching or nausea after eating.
An early feeling of fullness when eating. The feeling of fullness also is called satiety.
Stomach pain that happens unrelated to meals or goes away when eating.
When to see a doctor
Make an appointment with a healthcare professional if you experience constant symptoms that worry you.
Seek medical attention right away if you experience:
Bloody vomit.
Dark, tarry stools.
Shortness of breath.
Pain in your jaw, neck or arm.
Unexplained weight loss.
Causes
No one knows what causes functional dyspepsia. Medical professionals consider it a functional disorder. That means it can't be explained by a medical condition, so routine testing may not show any problems or causes. As a result, the diagnosis is based on symptoms.
Risk factors
Some factors can increase the risk of functional dyspepsia. They include:
Being female.
Using certain pain relievers that are available without a prescription. These include aspirin and ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others), which can cause stomach problems.
Smoking.
Anxiety or depression.
History of childhood physical or sexual abuse.
Helicobacter pylori infection.

Infectious Diseases A–Z: How to tell if your upset stomach is a viral infection
Deb Balzer
July 22, 2019
    

An upset stomach can be a result of many things. When symptoms include vomiting, diarrhea and fever, chances are it's a viral infection.
"A viral gastroenteritis, which we sometimes call 'a stomach bug' or 'a stomach flu,' is a common reason for having an acute onset of vomiting and diarrhea, and sometimes with fever," says Dr. Tina Ardon, a Mayo Clinic family medicine physician. The viral infection is mostly commonly spread through contact with an infected person or by ingesting contaminated food or water.
Watch: Dr. Tina Ardon explains viral gastroenteritis.
Journalists: Broadcast-quality sound bites with Dr. Tina Ardon are in the downloads at the end of the post. Please "Courtesy: Mayo Clinic News Network."
Ensuring you stay hydrated is imperative. Dr. Ardon says a person can become dehydrated quickly, even with a couple hours of vomiting or diarrhea. "When we say dehydrated, we're usually referring to a significant amount of fluid loss — either from vomiting or diarrhea."
It's important to stay hydrated with fluids, but what about eating? 
"Most patients have heard of something called the 'BRAT diet,' which stands for bananas, rice, applesauce, toast — basically indicating blander foods, softer foods that are gentler on the stomach," says Dr. Ardon. "However, studies actually show that if you're starting to feel better, resuming a normal diet is very appropriate. So one can consider that versus restricting their diet if they're otherwise feeling better."
Most cases of viral gastroenteritis will last about a day or two, and will resolve on their own.
"If things are continuing to improve, it's probably safe to continue watching for a couple days, but after that, if you're not having resolution of your symptoms, that's a good reason to go see your doctor," says Dr. Ardon

Mayo Clinic Minute: What to do if your child has an upset stomach
DeeDee Stiepan
September 24, 2019
    
Kids are back in the classroom, and so are plenty of germs. A common back-to-school sickness is viral gastroenteritis, or stomach flu. It's an intestinal infection marked by watery diarrhea, abdominal cramps, nausea or vomiting, and sometimes fever. 
Watch: The Mayo Clinic Minute
Journalists: Broadcast-quality video (0:58) is in the downloads at the end of this post. Please "Courtesy: Mayo Clinic News Network." Read the script.
If your child is showing symptoms of a stomach bug, such as vomiting or diarrhea, it's most likely viral gastroenteritis.
"We really want to make sure we're paying attention to their hydration," says Dr. Tina Ardon, a Mayo Clinic family medicine physician. "Even with a couple hours of vomiting or diarrhea, you can get dehydrated pretty quickly."
Dr. Ardon explains how parents can tell if their child is dehydrated.
Dr. Ardon says that you can determine dehydration by "monitoring someone's urine output, so less wet diapers in a baby or maybe less trips to the restroom for an older child," says Dr. Ardon.
To help improve hydration, without making the stomach more upset, Dr. Ardon suggests taking a sip or two of fluid every five to 10 minutes.
"When someone is having a lot of vomiting and diarrhea, you're not just losing fluids, you're losing electrolytes, as well. So, actually, oral rehydration solutions or therapies, which are available over-the-counter — there are a number of brand names available that patients can ask their physicians or their pharmacists about — … those are the best options that we can offer to our patients," says Dr. Ardon. 
Another option would be a diluted juice or sports drink. However, Dr. Ardon says be cautious with the excess sugar content, which can worsen diarrhea
Food poisoning (foodborne illness)
Request an Appointment
Symptoms &
causes
Diagnosis &
treatment
Overview
Food poisoning, a type of foodborne illness, is a sickness people get from something they ate or drank. The causes are germs or other harmful things in the food or drink.
Symptoms of food poisoning often include upset stomach, loose stools and vomiting. Symptoms most often start within hours or days of eating the food.


Most people with food poisoning have mild illness and get better without treatment. But sometimes food poisoning causes serious illness or complications.
Symptoms
Symptoms of food poisoning, a type of foodborne illness, vary depending on what causes the illness. They may begin within hours or weeks, depending on the cause.
Common symptoms are:
Upset stomach.
Vomiting.
Loose stools, sometimes bloody.
Stomach pain and cramps.
Fever.
Less often, food poisoning affects the nervous system. Then symptoms may include:
Blurred or double vision.
Headache.
Loss of movement in arms and legs, called paralysis.
Tingling or numbness of the skin.
Weakness.
When to see a doctor
Infants and children
Vomiting and loose stools can quickly cause low levels of body fluids, also called dehydration, in infants and children. This can cause serious illness in infants.
Call a healthcare professional if your child's symptoms include vomiting and loose stools and any of the following:
Changes in how the child thinks or acts.
Great thirst.
Little or no urination.
Weakness or dizziness.
Loose stools that last more than a day.
Vomiting often.
Stools that have blood or pus.
Severe pain in the stomach or where stool comes out, called the rectum.
Any fever in children under 2 years of age.
Fever of 102 degrees Fahrenheit (38.9 degrees Celsius) or higher in older children.
History of other medical problems.
Adults
See a healthcare professional or get emergency care if you have:
Nervous system symptoms, such as blurry vision, muscle weakness and skin tingling.
Changes in thinking or acting.
Fever of 103 degrees Fahrenheit (39.4 degrees Celsius) or higher.
Vomiting often.
Loose stool that lasts more than three days.
Symptoms of loss of body fluids, called dehydration. These may include great thirst, dry mouth, little or no urination, and feeling weak, dizzy or lightheaded.

